# General structure

The IR has a fairly standard structure, made up of basic blocks. Each basic
block has a list of statement and a terminator. While the implementation
occasionally refers to "phi nodes", the IR uses basic block arguments rather
than phi nodes.

The IR only represents the body of methods. The "shape" of the program, eg. its
classes, fields, method names and signatures, ... are all stored in the AST
instead. For each `Method` node in the AST, a corresponding `FnAnalysis` is
created, which, among others, contains the `MethodIR`.

A `MethodIR` is composed of one or more `FunctionIR`. This distinction is used
to encode the bodies of `when` clauses that appear within the method. The first
`FunctionIR` corresponds to the method body itself, whereas subsequent blocks
correspond to when block bodies.

Once created by the `ir/builder` pass, the IR is immutable. All new information
is represented in external side structures, as part of the `FnAnalysis`
structure.

# Type information

The IR itself contains almost no type information. Only types which appear in
the method body at the source level is included in the IR. At the moment, this
is just types used in a match block.

The inferred type of IR values is stored in maps in `FnAnalysis`. The type of
`v` in basic block `bb` can be found in `analysis->typecheck->types[bb][v]`.

Similarily, at construction, every method call site is assigned a
`TypeArgumentsId`, used to identify the call's type arguments. Given an `id`,
the inferred type arguments can be found in
`analysis->typecheck->type_arguments[id]`.

In both cases however, these are the polymorphic types. If a method or class is
generic, these types may mention type variables. The non-generic types will
only be known after reachabilitiy and reification.

# Statements
## `NewStmt`

Allocates a new object of a given class. It may optionally be given a `parent`
which designates the region in which the object should be allocated. If no
parent is specified, the object is allocated in a new region.

This will correspond to either a `rt::RegionTrace::create` or
`rt::RegionTrace::alloc` call, dependending on whether a new region needs to be
allocated.

The `parent` specified in the statement could be any object in the target
region; it may not be a reference to the region's entrypoint. On the other
hand, the runtime's `RegionTrace::alloc` method expects to be given the
region's entrypoint. The compiler therefore needs to do some work to find the
entrypoint given the specified parent.

## `CallStmt`

Call a method, on the specified receiver. The method is identified by its name.
At compile-time, the method's selector should be obtained from the given name.

In order to dispatch the call, in the general case, the selector should be used
to index into the object's vtable, to retrieve the address of the target.
Optimizations may enable us to dispatch the call statically, using for example,
the type of the receiver.

The method being called could be static or not (ie. does it accept a `self`
parameter, not to be confused with the dispatch strategy). In either case, the
receiver of the call is always passed as the first argument to the method.  In
the case of a static method call, the receiver may not be an actual object, but
only a pointer to a descriptor, as created by a `StaticTypeStmt`.

## `WhenStmt`

Schedule a behaviour on a set of cown. The `closure_index` corresponds to the
index of the body within the `MethodIR`.

This corresponds to a `rt::Cown::schedule` call. The message sent to the cowns
should provide storage for a pointer to the closure's body, the list of cowns
and the captures.

The closure's body will accept as many parameters as there are cowns and
captures specified. When invoking the body, each cown argument should be
transformed into a reference to its contents, before being passed as an
argument. The captures should be passed as is.

## `ReadFieldStmt`

Read a field from an object. The field is identified by its name. The general
case is similar to method calls: the field's selector is used to look up the
field's offset in the object's vtable.

## `WriteFieldStmt`

Write a field into an object. The procedure for locating the offset of the
field is identical to a field read.

When writing a reference counted value to an object in a region that is
equipped with a RememberedSet, the value should be inserted into the RS.
Otherwise, the reference count should be incremented.

## `IntegerLiteralStmt`, `StringLiteralStmt`, `UnitStmt`

These create values from a literal. The support for strings is very special
cased for demonstration purposes.

## `MatchBindStmt`

This is an unchecked cast, used at the top of the target of a match statement.

## `ViewStmt`

If the argument to the statement is an owned value, the statement produces an
unowned reference to the same object. Otherwise this is equivalent to a copy.

## `EndScopeStmt`

This statement is inserted whenever variables go out of scope. This may not be
the end of a BasicBlock, if a block expression is used for example.

This is where a value's "release" code should be executed. This could be
`rt::Region::release`, `rt::Cown::release` or `rt::Immutable::release`, for
owned, cown and immutable values, respectively. Unowned values do not need to
be released.

## `OverwriteStmt`

This is used after a local variable assignement, on the old SSA value bound to
this statement. The old value should be released, as in an `EndScopeStmt`. For
example, the code `var x = new A; x = new B; ...`, would be lowered to the
following IR:

```
0 <- new A
1 <- new B
overwrite(0)
// ...
end-scope(1)
```

The local `x` is originally assigned the SSA variable `0`, and later `1`. After
the assignement, the `overwrite(0)` statement encodes the fact that the old
value needs to be released.

Note that an SSA value that has been overwritten is never passed to an
"end-scope" statement. Only `x`'s new value, `1`, goes out of scope.

# Terminators

## Branch Terminator
## If Terminator
## Match Terminator

# Builtins

A number of language features don't need special syntax, but are instead
exposed as builtin methods, defined in `stdlib/builtin.verona`. This includes
arithmetic operations and some region operations such as freeze and trace.

The language features they represent isn't even expressible in the IR. Instead,
`codegen/builtins.cc` provides hardcoded lowerings into bytecode.

